---
layout: post
author: Erik Madison Bray
title: Report on Sage Days 102, University of Ibadan, Nigeria
image: SageDays102/group.jpg
tags:
    - blogpost
    - workshop
    - dissemination
    - sagemath
    - front-page
---

During the week of July 15 - 19 we held [Sage Days
102](https://wiki.sagemath.org/days102) at the University of Ibadan, in
Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria. This was (to our knowledge) the first ever
week-long workshop dedicated primarily to SageMath in Nigeria (although not
the first ever in West Africa; that honor belongs to [Sage Days
34.5](https://wiki.sagemath.org/days34.5) in Burkina Faso, October 2011),
and there was immense interest, with 80 registered participants, and many
others who had to be wait-listed.

The primary focus of the workshop was to introduce students and faculty to
computational mathematics with SageMath, as well as to on-board them to open
source mathematical and scientific computing in general. To that end we also
held sessions on GAP and R with the help of local experts.

All of the on-site organization and funding was provided by the University
of Ibadan Department of Mathematics, while OpenDreamKit provided travel
funding for four instructors (Erik Madison Bray from France, Yaé Ulrich Gaba
from South Africa, Evans Doe Ocansey from Austria, and Dr. Chimere Stanley
Anabanti from Nigeria), as well as for two PhD students (Olivia Adu-Poku
from Ghana and Gilda Bansimba from Congo). The instructors were also joined
by Dr. Olalekan K. Obisesan, a professor of statistics local to the
University of Ibadan.

The genesis of this workshop was at the [Free Computational
Mathematics](https://opendreamkit.org/2019/02/11/FreeComputationalMathematicsConference/)
conference, held at CIRM in France, February 2019, also sponsored by
OpenDreamKit.  That conference was attended by Ini Adinya, a lecturer in
mathematical finance at the University of Ibadan, along with two of her
colleagues.  They were impressed by how much they were learning at that
conference, and wanted to replicate it, or something like it, at the
University of Ibadan.  Ini and Erik had worked together during the
conference on some of her programming problems, and Erik agreed to come help
out and teach at such a workshop if they organized it.  And so, shortly
afterwards we got the ball rolling, with a big kick of help from Viviane
Pons who helped with much of the initial organizing, and especially the
search for additional instructors who would be willing to travel to (or from
within) Nigeria, as without several instructors there was no way the
workshop could be successful.  One of the IT managers at AIMS, the African
Institute for Mathematical Sciences, saw Viviane's e-mail on one of the Sage
mailing lists and forwarded it to Evans and Yaé, who had worked together
before teaching Sage in South Africa.  They in turn agreed it would be fun
to team up to help teach Sage in Nigeria, and we couldn't have done it
without them.

The following are Erik's notes on the workshop.


The Workshop
============

The workshop was held during the week, Monday through Friday, with official
times beginning at 9:00 am and ending at 5:00 pm, with a coffee break and a
lunch break, with catering provided by the department. (While this schedule
gave everyone a chance to breathe at the end of the day, as the exit-survey
suggests it left many people wanting for more, as a something like an
intensive "boot camp" retreat might have provided; an idea for a future
project.) Some teaching time was also lost to infrastructure problems, most
notably a power outage on Monday that lasted almost the entire afternoon
after lunch. Even then we persevered, stretching laptop batteries as long as
possible and using the whiteboard.

Despite that an other challenges (e.g. spotty internet access, technical
problems with people's computers and the projector, and not overall enough
instructors for the size of the group) there was a lot of spirit and
excitement for the subject matter, and most attendees got a lot out of it
and wished it could go even longer.

We started off Monday with a brief opening ceremony lead by leadership from
the Department of Mathematics and from the Faculty of Science including
Head of Department Dr. Deborah O. Ajayi who co-organized the workshop, and
Prof. A. Ayodele, Dean of the Faculty of Science.  Followed by this was a
brief talk to introduce Sage, the community around it, and to provide some
of the background to free and open source research computing in general, and
why it can be advantageous. Originally this talk was supposed to have some
slides and live demos, but as we did not have the projector working yet I
(Erik) gave the talk off-the-cuff to keep things moving while the technical
kinks were worked out.

![Opening speech by Dr. Ajayi]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/opening.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

Then, after the coffee break, I lead a brief introduction to using the
command-line shell, based on the [Software Carpentry
lesson](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/) but only with time to
cover basic filesystem navigation and manipulation, in which we wanted to
make sure all attendees had some common grounding. We had ambitions to then
teach some basic Git, in part that we might use it to distribute files, and
updates to those files, from the [Git repository for the
workshop](https://github.com/gabayae/sage-days-102).
However, due in large part to inconsistent network access between the
attendees, we had to abandon that idea and resort to distributing files on
USB drives, of which I brought nearly two dozen (more on that in Technical
Notes). The math department did provide a 4G modem/Wi-Fi router for
attendees to connect to, but with around 80 attendees it was difficult to
disseminate connection information to everyone, especially for people who
came on later days and missed the notice that they could use that access
point. In any case the tiny router would not have been able to handle 60+
simultaneous connections.

Here it should be noted, however that workshop was being held in a new
lecture hall building being constructed by the University, which when
completed (which it nearly is) will be as state-of-the-art as most I've ever
been in, with copious power outlets and ethernet ports at each desk, and
back rooms for the instructors to use as offices, and to gain access to the
racks of ethernet switches that the desk ports will be hooked up to. At the
time of this workshop it just wasn't fully hooked up yet, and was so new
that there was still shrink-wrap on the furniture and even on the
whiteboard, which we only even figured out on the second day.

![The whiteboard was not working well for some time before we realized it
still had its protective wrapping
on]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/whiteboard.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

By the time another such workshop is held, the lecture halls are expected to
be completed and fully functional. Even as-is I felt it worked quite well as
a facility. The only other suggestion I might have made was for a PA system,
as even with shouting it was hard to reach people in the very back of the
long room.

We finished Monday by getting Sage installed on as many machines as
possible, ensuring that most attendees could run the Jupyter Notebook, and
giving them an introduction to Python led by Yaé. Tuesday continued largely
with more of the same, with Yaé and Evans teaching introductory Python
programming (including basic types and data structures, loops and other
control structures, and how to define functions), as well as some basic
features of Sage itself.

![Evans teaches introduction to Sage]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/sage-session.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

Our original plan was that by Wednesday, attendees should break off into
more interest area-specific groups and possibly work on some specific
problems or group projects. In particular, Evans has introduced us to
creating interactive widgets in the Jupyter Notebook, with the hope that
attendees would be inspired to participate in a contest to develop the most
creative and interesting interacts. However, it was clear that we needed to
spend more time in the first half of the day on getting everyone up to speed
on Sage and Python basics, which was well appreciated.

For the second half of Wednesday we split into four separate, parallel
sessions for different topic interests:

* Graph theory and discrete math with Sage, headed by Erik and Evans.

* Numerical analysis and calculus with Sage, headed by Yaé.

* Group theory and algebra with GAP, headed by Chimere.

* Statistical analysis with R, headed by Olalekan.


![Attendance by session: Graph theory: 11; Calculus: 34; Group theory: 11; Statistics: 18]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/sessions.png){:class="img-responsive"}

It was good to have a representative from the GAP community, in part to
drive home the point I was making that SageMath could not exist without all
the technologies it is built on top of, and to give special emphasis to one
of them.  Similarly with R, although R is included as part of Sage, and Sage
includes an interface to R, the two are less tightly coupled than Sage and
GAP.  Nevertheless, although Sage does have useful facilities for
statistics, it has not often been the focus of most (although some) Sage
developers.  So this provided some of the best of both worlds for attendees
who were most interested in statistical analysis.

Chimere also provided a [separate
report]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/days102-gap-report.pdf) on the workshop and on what
was taught in his session.  It also includes a breakdown of his total
expenses for travel within Nigeria (from Enugu) which may be useful
information to have for planning future workshops.

![Yaé teaches
Sage in analysis session]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/analysis-session.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

![Olalekan teaches
R]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/r-session.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

This pattern seemed to be the most helpful to the most people, so for
Thursday we repeated it: In the morning we continued the general SageMath
and Python programming instruction from the tutorial notebooks we were
using, and in the afternoon split into the same break-out sessions, although
Olalekan was not able to attend Thursday, so most of his session's attendees
split off between the other sessions, or worked on their own.

Finally, on Friday, we spent a little more time following up with exercises
that were given in the break-out sessions, following up on attendees'
questions, and giving individual help where possible.  This continued most
of the morning.  Just before lunch, the whole class had a 30 minute Skype
session with Jessica Striker, an assistant professor at North Dakota State
University, and one of the organizers of the [first Women in Sage
workshop](https://opendreamkit.org/2017/04/06/WomenInSage/) held in Paris in
2017, also sponsored by OpenDreamKit.  She spoke to us about that workshop
and how it came about, as well as others like it since, and answered several
questions.  Although I did not get an exact gender breakdown of the
attendees, based on a rough head count it was just about 33% women in
attendance, if not slightly more. There was considerable interest among them
in attending a workshop like this in the future.  In fact, at least one
woman told me that she (along with two others from Nigeria) had been
accepted to attend the [second Women in Sage
workshop](https://opendreamkit.org/2019/06/28/WomenInSage/) held in June of
2019 in Crete, but had been denied visas, or at least were unable to obtain
them in time.  If a similar workshop were held in Nigeria, or elsewhere in
West Africa, it would likely be well-attended.

![Attendees of all ages were welcome]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/family-friendly.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

We closed Friday first with a meeting with the Vice Chancellor of the
University, Prof. Abel Idowu Olayinka, attended by the workshop organizers,
instructors, and a few of the students.  Then we had a brief but fun closing
ceremony, but many people were not ready for the workshop to be over,
despite losing power shortly afterwards.  We continued for nearly another
hour giving brief talks, and closed off by having three students present (as
best they could without a projector) their submissions for the interacts
contest.

![Students presented their interacts]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/interacts.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}


Impact
======

Many attendees expressed immense gratitude that we (the instructors) could
come and hold this workshop.  Nigeria is the largest country in Africa by
population, and the seventh largest in the world, with an estimated
population of about 200,000,000 in 2019, and ever growing, and the
University of Ibadan is a very large university of approximately 35,000
students and 1,500 academic staff.  It offers a deep well of highly
motivated and talented individuals.  Nevertheless, funding for research and
workshops is very limited, and spread thin across the country, inhibiting
opportunities for cooperation and collaboration.  Several attendees also
decried Nigeria's "poor reputation" on the world stage inhibiting
opportunities for funding and for international collaboration.  Indeed, the
number of international visitors to the University number in the dozens
annually.

So opportunities like this one, for students and faculty to receive expert
training on new technologies, are not nearly as frequent as they should be
(even despite there being some local experts such as Chimere and Olalekan)
and we tried to make as much of this one as we could.

As previously stated, we needed to spend more time brining the whole group
up to speed both on Python, and programming skills in general.  Had we done
a more formal pre-workshop survey we might have realized this earlier and
planned more teaching time in the first place, as 70% of the attendees did
not rate their programming knowledge highly (that said, this is far from a
perfect measure, as different people have different internal scales for how
much they think they know).

![Programming knowledge prior to the workshop: 1: 34.8%; 2: 36.4%; 3: 12.1%; 4: 6.1%; 5: 10.6%]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/programming-knowledge.png){:class="img-responsive"}

This suggests that the idea of having a more programming skills-focused
Software Carpentry workshop leading into Sage Days would have been useful
for many attendees.  Unfortunately there was just not enough time, as that
alone is typically two full days, and we wanted to get right into the
mathematics as soon as possible.  One of the most common
suggestions/wishes we saw in exit survey was just for more time.  E.g.

<cite>A little bit of days be extended for the workshop.</cite>

<cite>Increase the number of days and the instructor so that they can move
at our pace and impact us better.</cite>

<cite>The number of days for the workshop should be extended to allow wider
coverage of the concepts discussed and to aid assimilation</cite>

Nevertheless, people came away feeling like they learned more about Sage,
which was the most important thing.  We neglected to ask about GAP and R
in the exit survey, but those sessions were also very energetic and engaged,
and were likely similarly successful in imparting new knowledge.

![Sage knowledge prior to the workshop: 1: 80%; 2: 7.7%; 3: 4.6%; 4: 6.2%; 5: 1.5%]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/sage-knowledge-before.png){:class="img-responsive"}

![Sage knowledge following to the workshop: 1: 0%; 2: 3.1%; 3: 44.6%; 4: 41.5%; 5: 10.8%]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/sage-knowledge-after.png){:class="img-responsive"}

We also made an effort to ensure that attendees felt like they had resources
to use for further learning on their own, and that they knew where to go to
find help with Sage, and to remain involved in the community.

![Confidence of ability to find help with and learn more about Sage: 1: 0%; 2: 0%; 3: 16.7%; 4: 47%; 5: 36.4%]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/confidence-learning.png){:class="img-responsive"}

These numbers are encouraging, as they give the impression that attendees of
the workshop will be able to carry on their work with Sage, as well as help
their classmates and colleagues get started with it: Indeed the best
teachers for beginners with new software are often other beginners who have
had just enough expert-guided exposure, which is why having workshops like
this is so important, even if we can't reach everybody we'd like to in a
single workshop.

In the end, the majority of attendees felt strongly that the workshop was a
good opportunity to build new relationships with their peers, and that what
they learned and experience in the workshop would be of help to their future
careers.  We just need more workshops like this, and more frequently.

![Met interesting people for future collaboration: 1: 0%; 2: 3.1%; 3: 10.9%; 4: 35.9%; 5: 50%]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/future-collaboration.png){:class="img-responsive"}


![Learned things that will have an impact on future career/research: 1: 1.6%; 2: 0%; 3: 1.6%; 4: 17.2%; 5: 79.7%]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/future-impact.png){:class="img-responsive"}


Technical Notes
===============

The discussion here is based in part on data collected in the exit survey,
and in part from direct experience helping attendees install and configure
Sage on their personal laptops.

One of the major challenges in the past of running Sage workshops in some
parts of the world such as Africa and parts of Asia has been the
overwhelming dominance of Windows on attendees personal laptops.  This is a
challenge, as Sage and most of the computer algebra systems it wraps were
developed in the free and open-source software ecosystem, which
traditionally has been oriented around UNIX-like operating systems such as
GNU/Linux and BSD, as well as MacOS (which presents its own challenges, but
is still compatible with POSIX, the main standard for UNIX-like OSes).
Windows, however, has never been POSIX-compatible, which can make it an
enormous challenge to port complex software to Windows.  Thus, Windows users
were long relegated to klunky and slow workarounds, such as a running Sage
in a Linux virtual machine.  Even this is not an option in many cases, as
attendees laptops may lack--or barely meet--the hardware specifications
needed to run a VM efficiently.

That situation has vastly improved since the August 2017 release of
[SageMath for Windows](https://opendreamkit.org/2017/10/11/SageWindows/),
thanks to work funded by OpenDreamKit
([T3.1](https://github.com/OpenDreamKit/OpenDreamKit/issues/50)).  This has
made Sage installation on Windows 7 (64-bit) and up relatively easy, like
installing any other Windows application.  Performance on Windows is still
lacking--in particular start-up time of Sage--especially on older machines.
But once it is up and running it provides a fully usable Sage, with
relatively few caveats (and continuing improvement).

Of the attendees of this workshop, almost all were using Windows as their
primary OS.  Four people were using Linux.  Zero had MacOS.  We had asked
attendees to please try on their own to install SageMath before coming, so
that we could have as much time as possible to help those who did not.
Unfortunately very few people did this, in large part just because the
SageMath installer, even while heavily compressed, is nearly 1 GB in size
which was prohibitive for many attendees to download.  In anticipation of
this, I brought nearly two dozen USB drives, many of them pre-loaded with
the Sage installers for most supported OSes.  By passing these around, most
attendees were quickly able to copy the installer to their computers and run
it.  In retrospect, before anything else, we should have led the entire
class in a tutorial on this and do it all together, as there was a
large-enough portion who needed help, and those who had already done it
could take that opportunity to help their neighbors as well.  Instead, much
time was spent, especially the first two days of the workshop, on individual
support. Though as some attendees learned more and got more comfortable with
the software, they also began enthusiastically helping each other as we'd
hoped.

![Attendees worked closely with each other to overcome technical
challenges]({{ site.baseurl }}/public/images/SageDays102/cooperation.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

The Sage for Windows installer has improved enough in the last year that
most attendees did not encounter any problems with running the installer, or
starting Sage once it was installed.  By far, the largest technical
challenge was presented by the plethora of different virus scanners and
other PC security software installed on peoples' computers.  Sage for
Windows works on top of [Cygwin](https://www.cygwin.com/), the venerable
POSIX emulation system for Windows.  A long-known issue is that certain
virus scanners can interfere with Cygwin in different ways: Sometimes that
interference occurs at runtime resulting in strange bugs.  Other times it
happens passively: For example some virus scanners would delete files from
the Sage/Cygwin installation in which it found false-positives.  In almost
all cases where users were experiencing strange bugs, either during
installation or runtime, adding an exception for Sage to their virus
scanners, or even temporarily disabling their virus scanners, would resolve
the problem.  So a major take-away was that we need better documentation of
this issue for Sage users on Windows, and instructions for how to create
exceptions for Sage in various popular virus scanners.

The other major issue was that due to technical difficulties inherent to
both Windows, and the large size of Sage, the Windows version still does not
work at all for 32-bit installations of Windows.  We hope that the number of
installed 32-bit Windows will decrease over time, but it is still more
common than we would like, especially on some older laptops we saw with low
amounts (2 GB) of RAM.  This is even despite the machines having 64-bit CPU
architectures.

For now, the only available workaround for 32-bit Windows users was to run a
Linux distribution with Sage pre-installed.  But rather than have them run
it in a VM, they could use a "live Linux" USB drive, which boots their
computer directly (without installing anything) into a Linux distribution
called [AIMS Desktop](https://desktop.aims.ac.za/).  Developed by AIMS, AIMS
Desktop provides a user-friendly Linux distribution designed specifically
for running open source mathematics ad science software, and includes a
working version of Sage out-of-the-box.  This allowed users to boot into a
fully working and efficient OS, and start up Sage, often in as little as a
minute.

Using AIMS Desktop is a double-edged sword: On one hand it puts users in a
new, possibly unfamiliar computing environment, without access to all their
normal programs or files (though we did have time to show some users how to
access their Windows files from within AIMS Desktop).  On the other hand,
for explicit purpose of running software like Sage, it provides an arguably
better overall user experience, and can run better than Windows on older
computers, as the operating system itself is less resource-intensive.  It
was designed with users throughout Africa in mind, though nothing about it
is *specific* to Africa.  Of the 13 attendees who tried AIMS Desktop, at
least 5 liked it enough to install it permanently on their computers,
side-by-side with Windows in a dual-boot configuration. Of those we helped
with AIMS Desktop installation, the installation only failed on one machine
(an older Compaq laptop), which was unable to boot it after installation.
Based on a count of the USB drives that were returned, at least 9 attendees
also kept their AIMS Desktop USB drives, and might decide to install it
later (most of them asked for permission to keep it, but this was partly the
intent in bringing so many in the first place so it was expected and even
hoped that people would keep them).  It could even be said that those who
were using AIMS Desktop were some of the most engaged, as not being on their
normal Windows installations provided fewer distractions.

There were still more 32-bit Windows users than expected, however, and it
was unfortunate to have to tell them that they couldn't install Sage.  It
would be best if they could seek local tech support to upgrade to a 64-bit
Windows, where possible.  But it might also be worth re-visiting the idea of
creating a 32-bit version of Sage for Windows.  It's possible that a
stripped-down version of Sage, that does not work in all edge cases, but is
at least good enough to run the introductory Sage tutorials, could be
developed.

These issues aside, we got Sage installed on about 65 computers for people
who otherwise had mostly never used Sage, and did not have reliable internet
access (and will be able to shared it with their friends and colleagues, as
most of them kept a copy of the installer on their desktop).  That alone is
a big success!
